Welcome to Wonder Cabinet.
I'm Anne Strangehamps.
And I'm Steve Paulson.
Where do you go when you need a dose of wonder?
A way to lift your spirits, let go of the day's heaviness.
Well, the biggest frame of reference we have is the cosmos,
an entire universe of expanded horizons and limitless possibility.
Where time flows differently, space bends and curves,
and reality is so much more than what our senses tell us.
Imagine you're a theoretical physicist.
You spend your whole life on the edge of all that wonder.
Every day you wake up and you do your best to understand it just a little bit better.
Maybe even discover something new.
What was it like for you to see that first photograph of the black hole?
Do you remember?
Yes, it was an incredible emotion.
It's like, you know, we've been studying an animal, mysterious all your life,
and then you see it.
Well, it exists, it's real.
This is Carlo Rovelli, and he is one of the world's most celebrated physicists.
Author of a string of best-selling books, including
Seven Brief Lessons on Physics, Reality is Not What It Seems, and The Order of Time.
We thought we would start this hour by playing this little story
that he told me a few years ago about one of his own favorite moments of wonder.
The best experience has not been the picture of the black hole,
which is a few years ago,
but a little bit before that,
there was the announce of the detection of the gravitational waves
that was produced by a black hole.
Since there are so many black holes in the sky,
they can meet and fall into one another.
They fall into one another,
they start orbiting, turning around,
then orbiting faster and faster, getting closer and closer,
faster, faster, faster, faster, faster, closer, closer, closer,
then whoop!
They just eat each other, so to say.
And if they do so,
they produce this enormously strong oscillation of space,
which is what was detected.
The announcement of that was given publicly,
and the press conference was during a class
I was giving to my students in Marseille on general relativity.
So I told the students,
look, there is this press conference,
they say they have gravitational waves,
they have not seen what they have seen,
they say they have seen,
and I turned the computer on,
in front of the class,
but before, I gave them the theory.
I explained to them that the black hole can merge,
and they produce this wave,
and oscillations, which first is slow and weak,
and then become faster and higher.
So if it was a sound,
it would be something like,
whoop!
It's a chirp,
the chirp of the black hole.
Whip!
And I drew the shape of this wave of the black hole.
Then we turned the computer on,
to the press conference.
The black holes are getting closer and closer to one another.
There is great emotion.
They're going to merge.
Boom.
The first time that this has ever been seen.
As I said,
We can hear gravitational waves.
We can hear the universe.
And this is a signal that we have measured.
There's the rumbling noise,
and then there's the chirp.
The shape of the wave appears,
and is exactly equal to the shape of drone of the black hole.
Whoop!
That's the chirp we've been looking for.
And the students,
it was a class of 20, 30 students,
all together,
Wow!
What?
There's like science at it best.
When you're really,
when you're really science,
it's shining.
Gravitational waves.
We did it.
That is an episode we did on
To the Best of Our Knowledge a while back,
and today we are excited to bring you
a brand new conversation with Carlo Rovelli.
Recorded at the Island of Knowledge in Italy.
Which, to be clear,
is not an actual island.
It's a small think tank in Tuscany
where three times a year,
small groups of scientists and philosophers
come together to explore some really big questions.
And this time,
Rovelli was there.
What do you want to talk about?
What's the topic?
You.
Oh boy.
Okay.
So I want to take you back
to your early years as a scientist.
Why did you want to become a physicist?
That was not an early call.
My actual plan after high school
was to go traveling the world.
My ambition was to become a beggar.
Really?
Yeah.
Travel around the world,
I don't know.
As a beggar.
The modern St. Francis,
holding out your hat.
Yeah, exactly.
You got it right.
It was not a lack of estimate in myself.
It was an overestimation.
The models were St. Francis or Buddha, right?
So it was an overambition.
So I have read that
one of your form of experiences,
probably more than one,
is psychedelics.
When you were a teenager,
LSD in particular?
Well, psychedelics is even before that.
Okay.
In fact, I was a teenager.
I was 16.
Ah.
I got into that because the little I read about it
sounded completely fascinating,
the idea of exploring state of consciousness,
seeing the world differently,
going with the mind, who knows where.
These were the early 70s.
I grew up in Verona.
It was a sort of provincial small town in Italy.
But I was visiting Paris.
And then a friend of a friend, you know,
said, oh, maybe I can get some LSD.
There is somebody,
a people called Los Pagnole, the Spanish.
I'll ask for him.
So he sell us these little pieces of paper
and we have no idea whether it's just cheating us.
Oh, these were like the acid blotters.
Yeah, exactly.
That was a first.
And it was a spectacular experience.
It was extremely powerful,
which left a big impact on me.
Why did it make such an impact on you?
It upset my sense of what I knew about reality entirely.
I was very young.
I mean, this was before my first girlfriend.
Yeah.
I mean, 16.
16.
That's young to start taking psychedelics.
LSD in particular.
It is young, yes.
I had the good fortune of a friend
that gave me the simplest, best instruction about it.
She said, look, whatever happens, don't worry, don't panic,
don't resist, let it go.
You're going to come back.
So, I mean, there was a first phase in which just dancing colors
and, you know, the houses becoming fat and beautiful.
All this.
Right.
What were solid lines became wavy.
Yeah, everything wavy and all this theater.
And we were, the three of us, super happy.
And then, but that was only the beginning.
Then at some point, I felt this wave arriving on me
and I just sat down under a tree.
We were in a park in the night
and put my hands in front of my eyes
and just felt that I was going totally elsewhere.
I remember the first images were this huge red color
that was opening and me going in and then closing behind me
and then this blue screen and opening and me going.
And I said, oh boy, what's going on here?
There was no, nothing of what was familiar around.
No space, no time, no myself.
With incredible beauty, incredible emotion,
incredible intensity.
Was it a single experience or did you have a few more like that?
No, I repeated it.
I'm talking about the first one
because it was really the one which opened up a world for me.
I repeated it not many times,
maybe in my life less than 10 times during my youth.
Then I stopped.
What did I took away from that?
You know, I do quantum gravity.
I do fundamental physics.
What is space?
What is time?
This seems like good training.
Yeah, exactly.
To become a theoretical physicist,
to question the nature of reality.
In a sense, yes.
I think there was a liberating, intellectually liberating thing.
The sense that reality can be profoundly different from our everyday.
The everyday view of reality, probably rooted in that,
I've always felt is like our sleepwalking without seeing what's behind it.
I mean, you're talking about experiences you had 50 years ago.
I'm talking about, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And you're saying you still think about those.
I still think about that.
Yeah.
So you went on, of course, to become a major theoretical physicist.
Yeah, much later.
I went to physics 10 years later.
But it sounds like those experiences maybe help push you in the direction
of wanting to become a physicist.
Yeah, maybe.
I was, yeah, sure.
I was rebellious as a kid.
I grew up in a loving family and in a provincial Italy, a bit fascist.
I was covered by love by my mother.
You know, love is the greatest thing around, but sometimes it's heavy.
I needed to run away.
The same summer in Paris, I met a friend from Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria,
which at the time was the other side of the Iron Curtain.
It was the Soviet world.
We went into enormous political discussions and he kept saying,
yeah, you should come and see.
And so I decided to go.
So 16 alone, I hitchhiked through Europe from Paris to Sofia,
a thousand kilometers, sleeping in the fields.
I crossed into Soviet world.
And that was another liberating, mind liberating experience for me.
I realized that the Soviet world was nothing like we were told
by the Western propaganda.
But the shocking thing was that the Soviet propaganda was describing
a Western world, which is nothing like my experience.
So I realized that Europe was living at the time split in two parts.
Each one was telling a story about the other, which is completely fake.
And since then, I became very sensitive to propaganda somehow.
I listened to the news.
And even today, I spend my time listening to news from all over the world.
I regularly make the tour.
I listen to the Chinese, to the Indians, to the Brazilian, to the Iranians,
to the South Africans, to the Americans, the British, the Italian.
And it's so obvious that everybody's telling stories.
Well, and it's just, I mean, going back to those early years, too.
I mean, you said you started getting really interested in politics.
I mean, I know you became a student radical.
I mean, literally, manning the barricades.
I was a student radical.
There was a rebellion movement in Italy in the late 70s,
which was a long way from the sort of the 60s.
So, yes, I was involved in this radical politics.
I was fascinated by radical movements.
I mean, from Che Guevara to Mao Zedong, there was that generation.
And you were arrested at one point, right, for refusing military service?
I was arrested for refusing military service because I was strongly pacifist in that sense.
I don't believe in borders, even today.
I don't believe in patria.
They say I'm not patriotic.
Patriotism.
I don't believe in patriotism.
I believe in the fact that we are a single tribe all over the planet.
So, I want to come back to this.
I want to come back to politics.
But I want to spend a little bit of time talking about your work as a physicist.
Well, that was somehow the moment of political engagement ended up with quite a disappointment.
To put it brutally, we want to change the world,
made a revolution for a more gentle world without weapons, without borders.
And we failed.
We lost the revolution.
So, I had to find something else to do.
And at that precise moment, I fell in love with physics.
It was madly falling in love with physics.
Why did you fall in love with physics?
Because quantum mechanics and general relativity are the most beautiful human creations.
First, Einstein theory.
General relativity is incredibly spectacular.
It's better than LSD.
I mean, it's telling that reality is profoundly different than what we instinctively think.
But in a way, that works so well.
I mean, there's this curving of space, stretching on time.
And yet, this works fantastically to describe things which are really on the universe.
Gravitation waves, black holes, suspenseful universe.
So, it was the sense that you were getting closer to sort of what the nature of reality was?
Was that the fascination?
Or was it sort of at a mathematical level?
No, it was not mathematics.
I would have never been fascinated by mathematics.
I'm bored by mathematics.
I'm not a good mathematician.
I have to struggle through mathematics.
But it's sort of, my sense is, it's sort of like, I mean, the great thing about theoretical
physics is, I mean, you're sort of cracking the code in a sense of, you know, how all of
this, you know, is structured, came into being in a way, right?
Yes and no.
I would say it's a strong feeling of raising a veil and seeing something that you couldn't
see before.
Understanding profoundly better reality.
But that doesn't mean cracking the code.
And I never thought, and I still don't think, that science is getting at the bottom of things.
It's getting one more layer.
But maybe there's another layer.
There's another layer again.
I don't like the idea that we are getting to the bottom.
Well, I'm surprised that you say that because, I mean, your work on quantum gravity, I mean,
one of the things that you're famous for is this effort to reconcile these two
raving models of physics, of general relativity and quantum mechanics, which, you know, no
one has figured out how to sort of bring those two together.
Exactly.
And I think that there is a way of putting the two together.
That's what basically I spent my life on.
I've been paid all my life for trying.
And with friends and colleagues, we have a tentative way of bringing together quantum mechanics and Einstein
theories.
General relativity, I hope it works.
I hope it's good.
And I think it is understanding something more about the world, something deeper about
the world.
But look, if you have a girlfriend, you understand her better.
Do you really think you know everything about her?
No, of course not.
And so it's reality.
It's exactly.
It's like a girlfriend.
And it's wonderful when you open your eyes, when you communicate with a person.
And it's equally wonderful when you communicate with nature.
You see something about nature you didn't see before.
So, generativity is this kind of discovery.
Wow, we realize that this idea of a rigid space in which we are in a common time, this
is all approximation.
It's not the reality, right?
It's far more complicated than that.
So, you see beyond it, and you see more.
But I don't have the ambition that this, I've got the looking to the, talking to God
and getting to the bottom.
I mean, no, you know, not finding ultimate reality, but maybe getting a little closer
to what is real.
A little better understanding of this abyssal thing.
We don't know the fundamental law of quantum gravity yet.
We don't have a unified theory.
So, there's so many things we don't know.
We live in an open, marvelous, beautiful, mysterious, sacred universe of which we understand a lot.
And we are happy to understand a lot.
It is an incredibly beautiful feeling to understand more.
And I want to contribute to understand more.
So, we're at a scientific conference right now in Italy, 30 miles south of Siena.
Beautiful countryside.
Beautiful countryside.
We're part of this Island of Knowledge think tank.
And the point of this particular meeting that we're at is asking some really big questions.
One is, is there ultimate reality?
I mean, that is one of the questions that's been put on the table here.
And I have to say, you had a fascinating answer to that.
I mean, you said when you were young, this was an agonizing question for you.
But no longer.
You say, you say it's a bad question and we should not ask that question.
So, before we get to why you say this is a bad question,
I want to take you back to when you were young and when you agonized over that question.
Okay.
While Carlo thinks about this, we're going to take a short break.
We'll be right back.
